[SYCL][Doc] Define buffer_location property for USM allocations (#5665)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_intel_runtime_buffer_location.asciidoc

> = SYCL_INTEL_usm_runtime_properties

Reviewer: We are standardizing on a new template for extensions.  Can you use the template in #5663 for this extension?  In order to do that, you will need to decide:

* Is this a "oneapi" or an "intel" extension?
* Is this a "supported" or an "experimental" extension?

Author: Thanks for the pointer to template!

Currently this extension will be in intel extension (let me know if it makes more sense to be an oneapi extension

It is also an experimental extension given this is a workaround.

This document propose a new buffer_location runtime property that can be passed to `malloc_device`.

== Name Strings

+SYCL_INTEL_runtime_buffer_location+

== Contributors
Aditi Kumaraswamy, Intel +
Gregory Lueck, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Sherry Yuan, Intel +
Steffen Larsen, Intel

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2020 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

== Status

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software products.

== Version

Built On: {docdate} +
Revision: 1

== Overview

This spec describes the solution of passing runtime buffer location properties to malloc APIs, specifically `malloc_device`.

On targets that provide more than one type of global memory, this provide users the flexibility of choosing which memory the device usm should be allocated to.

> This information is not a hint; it is a functional requirement of the program that must be respected.

Reviewer: I think I started a conversation about this someplace else too ... It would be better if this extension had some defined behavior when the device is not FPGA.  It seems like "buffer location" is a concept that only makes sense on FPGA-type devices.  In this case, it seems like it would make sense to say that the `buffer_location` is allowed when allocating memory for any device, but it only has an effect when the device is an FPGA.

Author: Thanks I mentioned it in the [Note] section

Reviewer: I'd suggest removing this last sentence.  This is only the overview section.  There should be a more formal definition of the property below in the "Specification" section.

== Examples

[source,c++]
----
array = (int *)malloc_device<int>(
        N * sizeof(int), q,
        property_list{property::buffer::detail::buffer_location(2)});

sycl::queue q;
q.parallel_for(range<1>(N), [=] (id<1> i){
  data[i] *= 2;
}).wait();
----

== Proposal

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification, Section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros". Therefore, an
implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro

> `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_RUNTIME_BUFFER_LOCATION` to one of the values defined in the table below.

Reviewer: When you use the new document template, make sure the name of the feature-test macro is exactly the same as the name of the extension (but in upper case).

Author: The feature test macro is now changed to `SYCL_EXT_INTEL_RUNTIME_BUFFER_LOCATION` to align with `sycl_ext_intel_runtime_buffer_location`

Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the
implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features
that the implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version
|===

=== Changes to runtime properties

To pass the runtime properties into malloc API, a new buffer properties is introduced.

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace property {
namespace buffer {

> namespace detail {

Reviewer: This namespace does not seem right.  I think it should be one of the following depending on whether this is a "oneapi" vs. an "intel" extension and on whether the extension is supported vs. experimental:

* `sycl::ext::oneapi::property::usm`
* `sycl::ext::intel::property::usm`
* `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::property::usm`
* `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm`

Author: Thanks! Namespace is modified to `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm`

class buffer_location
    : public sycl::detail::PropertyWithData<
          sycl::detail::PropWithDataKind::AccPropBufferLocation> {
public:
  buffer_location(uint64_t Location) : MLocation(Location) {}

>   uint64_t get_buffer_location() const { return MLocation; }

Reviewer: I think the type of `location` should be `int`, not `uint64_t`.  This matches what we have in [sycl_ext_intel_buffer_location](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/sycl_ext_intel_buffer_location.asciidoc).

Also, the code synopsis should not show the implementation details.  Just show  the API.  Therefore, just show something like:

```
class buffer_location {
 public:
  buffer_location(int location);
  int get_buffer_location() const;
};
```

Author: Thanks for the example! Spec changed accordingly.

// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

== Status
This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

== Overview

This document propose a new buffer_location runtime property that can be passed to `malloc_device`.

> On targets that provide more than one type of global memory, this provide users the flexibility of choosing which memory the device usm should be allocated to.

Reviewer: Sorry, I have one more formatting comment.  Can you break all these long lines at 80 columns, matching the other text in the template?

Author: Thank you for all the quick reviews and thanks for making this process smooth for the workaround! I have break all lines to be less than 80 char.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_INTEL_RUNTIME_BUFFER_LOCATION` to one of the values defined in the table
below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

== Examples

[source,c++]
----
array = (int *)sycl::malloc_device<int>(
        N, q,
        sycl::property_list{sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location(2)});

sycl::queue q;
q.parallel_for(sycl::range<1>(N), [=] (sycl::id<1> i){
  data[i] *= 2;
}).wait();
----

=== Changes to runtime properties

> This extension adds the new property `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location` which applications can pass in the property_list parameter to all overloads of the `sycl::malloc_device()`, `sycl::malloc_shared()`, `sycl::malloc_host()`  function. However, this property has no effect when passed to `sycl::malloc_shared()`, `sycl::malloc_host()`. Following is a synopsis of this property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension adds the new property `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location` which applications can pass in the property_list parameter to all overloads of the `sycl::malloc_device()`, `sycl::malloc_shared()`, and `sycl::malloc_host()`  functions. However, this property has no effect when passed to `sycl::malloc_shared()` or `sycl::malloc_host()`. Following is a synopsis of this property.
```

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm {

class buffer_location {
 public:
  buffer_location(int location);
  int get_buffer_location() const;
};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm
----

> On targets that provide more than one type of global memory, `buffer_location` allows user to specify which of the global memory to allocate memory to. This provide user the flexibility to choose the global memory that satisfy requirements for bandwidth and throughput.

Author: Yes, I think this is the conventional terminology used for describing FPGA global memories. The same terminology was also used in the accessor buffer location spec  `SYCL_INTEL_buffer_location`

// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

== Status
This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

[NOTE]
====

> This extension is currently implemented in {dpcpp} only for FPGA devices.  Attempting to use this extension on other devices or backends may result in no effect.

Reviewer: I don't think this should be a NOTE in the status section.  We should use notes like this only when the current implementation is incomplete, and the note explain what is not yet  implemented.  In this case, the formal specification of the property should state that the property is ignored for non-FPGA devices.  That is the intended behavior of the property, not something that is missing due to an incomplete specification.

> This serves as a temporary workaround for usm allocation to accept buffer location properties, and the formal solution will come in the future.

Reviewer: I don't think you need to say this either.  Therefore, I think you can remove this NOTE entirely.

====

== Overview

This document propose a new buffer_location runtime property that can be passed to `malloc_device`.

On targets that provide more than one type of global memory, this provide users the flexibility of choosing which memory the device usm should be allocated to.

This information is not a hint; it is a functional requirement of the program that must be respected.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_INTEL_RUNTIME_BUFFER_LOCATION` to one of the values defined in the table
below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

== Examples

[source,c++]
----

> array = (int *)malloc_device<int>(
>         N * sizeof(int), q,
>         property_list{sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location(2)});
> 
> sycl::queue q;
> q.parallel_for(range<1>(N), [=] (id<1> i){
>   data[i] *= 2;
> }).wait();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
array = (int *)sycl::malloc_device<int>(
        N, q,
        sycl::property_list{sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location(2)});

sycl::queue q;
q.parallel_for(sycl::range<1>(N), [=] (sycl::id<1> i){
  data[i] *= 2;
}).wait();
```

----

=== Changes to runtime properties

> To pass the runtime properties into malloc API, a new buffer properties is introduced.

Reviewer: Be more precise here.  Is the new property allowed only for `sycl::malloc_device()`, or is it allowed also for the other USM malloc's?  For example, say something like:

> This extension adds the new property `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location` which applications can pass in the `property_list` parameter to all overloads of the `sycl::malloc_device()` function.  Following is a synopsis of this property.

Author: Technically yes, other malloc api can also accept this property, however they will not have any functional effect. I have made this comment in the spec. It is currently phrased as:

```
This extension adds the new property `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm::buffer_location`` which applications can pass in the property_list parameter to all overloads of the `sycl::malloc_device()`, `sycl::malloc_shared()`, `sycl::malloc_host()`  function. However, this property has no effect when passed to `sycl::malloc_shared()`, `sycl::malloc_host()`. Following is a synopsis of this property.
```

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm {

class buffer_location {
 public:
  buffer_location(int location);
  int get_buffer_location() const;
};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental::property::usm
----

> 

Reviewer: Add a formal description of the property here.  This description should explain what the `location` parameter means.  This is also the place to explain what happens if you specify the property for a non-FPGA device.  I was suggesting earlier that it could simply be ignored for non-FPGA devices, but I suppose we could instead say that `sycl::malloc_device()` throws an exception in this case.  I'm not sure which would be more convenient for users.  This section of the document should tell users what to expect in this scenario, though.

BTW, are there any special restrictions about how the pointer is used inside the kernel?  If there are, those need to be documented here also.
